abstract for GSoC Project: Improving Strings Support in Fortran (#14)
fortran-lang/talks: FortranCon2021-string/README.md

# FortranCon 2021: Improving Strings Support in Fortran (GSoC Project)

__Presenter__: [Aman Godara](https://aman-godara.github.io)

__Co-Authors__: [Sebastian Ehlert](https://github.com/awvwgk), [Milan Curcic](https://github.com/milancurcic)

__Session__: Fortran-lang Mini Symposium

__Abstract__:  
To provide better support for strings, the Fortran Standard Library (*stdlib*) introduces `stdlib_string_type`, `stdlib_strings` and `stdlib_stringlist` module.

> Since the start of the project, several string inquiry and manipulation procedures like *pad*, *find*, *replace_all*, etc have been added adhering to the philosophy of unifying the community and providing simple & intuitive abstraction to the users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the start of the project, several string inquiry and manipulation procedures like *pad*, *find*, *replace_all*, etc have been added, adhering to the philosophy of unifying the community and providing simple and intuitive abstraction to the users.
```

> Aiming to provide better strings support in **Fortran** *stdlib* now has *string_type* module, which still is in its experimental phase, which defines the underlying structure of strings. Keeping in mind the unprecedented need to change the underlying structure, modules providing support for string operations (*stdlib_strings*) and list of strings (*stdlib_stringlist*) are kept separate, also allowing for parallel development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To provide better support for strings, the Fortran Standard Library (*stdlib*) introduces the `string_type` module with a derived type of the same name.
The `string_type` derived type is compatible with all standard intrinsic procedures that work with the `character` type, and other high-level string inquiry and manipulation procedures, such as `slice`, `find`, and `replace_all`.
Two other modules, one for general string operations (`stdlib_strings`) and another for lists of strings (`stdlib_stringlist`) are developed separately, allowing for parallel development.
```

> 
> Developers are required to ensure, irrespective of the underlying structure and sequence of operations, that the abstraction provided is intuitive, easy to understand and equips a user only with the necessary details to work with strings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As this is a work in progress, we welcome any feedback from the Fortran community to design an intuitive and easy-to-use strings user interface.
```

> APIs, being the community's voice, provide every type of usage from common ones like *reversing a string* to peculiar ones like *finding n-th non-overlapping substring*. High-level APIs are as flexible as *slice* catering to every possible need and low-level APIs are as optimised as *count* to readily build upon (as stand-alone or in combination with other provided APIs) to meet any specific requirement of a user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every type of usage from common ones like *reversing a string* to peculiar ones like *finding n-th non-overlapping substring* are developed in close collaboration with the community.
Flexible high-level procedures like *slice* catering to every possible need while low-level APIs like *count* are optimized to readily build upon (as stand-alone or in combination with other provided APIs) to meet any specific requirement of a user.
```

> 
> To continue to serve its past users and gain new users, the community has adopted a philosophy of making **Fortran** more interactive, keeping APIs at a low-level first to slowly build up to high-level ones with the community's acceptance and making APIs backward compatible. Adoption of this philosophy was critical for the acceptance of the *stdlib* as the "go-to" library for writing **Fortran** programs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To serve its past and new users alike, *stdlib* adopts a philosophy to keep low-level APIs first, and incrementally build up to high-level ones with the community's acceptance and in a backward compatible fashion. We believe that the adoption of this philosophy is critical for the acceptance of the *stdlib* as the "go-to" library for writing Fortran programs.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Added APIs work with deferred-length intrinsic character as smoothly as with *string_type* giving a seamless integration between the two making them ready to be imported even to an ongoing project. Moreover, APIs being backward compatible continue to serve old projects even with their latest versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All procedures work both with deferred-length intrinsic character as smoothly as with *string_type*.
This allows seamless integration of stdlib's string processing with existing projects.
```

Reviewer 3: I wish to add this line: Moreover, APIs being backward compatible continue to serve old projects even with their latest versions.

I might have missed the reason why you @awvwgk deleted it, let me know if there is any issue with this line.
